
Release Notes for X I18N code contributions

APPLICABLE COPYRIGHT NOTICE:

Copyright 1985, 1986, 1987, 1991, 1998  The Open Group

Portions Copyright 2000 Sun Microsystems, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
"Software"), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions: The above copyright notice and this
permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial
portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE OPEN GROUP OR SUN MICROSYSTEMS, INC. BE LIABLE
FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF
CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION
WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE EVEN IF
ADVISED IN ADVANCE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

Except as contained in this notice, the names of The Open Group and/or
Sun Microsystems, Inc. shall not be used in advertising or otherwise
to promote the sale, use or other dealings in this Software without
prior written authorization from The Open Group and/or Sun
Microsystems, Inc., as applicable.

X Window System is a trademark of The Open Group

OSF/1, OSF/Motif and Motif are registered trademarks, and OSF, the OSF
logo, LBX, X Window System, and Xinerama are trademarks of the Open
Group. All other trademarks and registered trademarks mentioned herein
are the property of their respective owners. No right, title or
interest in or to any trademark, service mark, logo or trade name of
Sun Microsystems, Inc. or its licensors is granted.

IN THIS RELEASE:

This is the first phase of I18N code to be released by Sun for use
with The X Window System.  In this release, we have included all of
the input/output method technology as well as language and layout
engines which we could verify were the sole property of Sun or which
was otherwise suitable to be made available as open source.

Since not all of Sun's I18N code was available for this release, we
are including some notes both on the content of the files we are
providing, and on the pieces which are currently missing, as well
as our plans for the future.

THE FILES:

XI18N_RELEASE_NOTES.txt
    - this file.

xc.tar.gz
    - changes in libX11 to allow dynamic load of XIM and XOM modules,
      located in xc/lib/X11
    - The xi18n modules dlopened by libX11 in xc/lib/X11/xlibi18n
    - X locale database files for ja, ko, zh, zh_TW, and en_US.UTF-8
      locales, located in xc/nls/
      
contrib_i18n_layout_engine.tar.gz
    - Text layout engines for Thai, Arabic, and Hebrew.

contrib_i18n_language_engine.tar.gz
    - language dictionary lookup modules for Simplified Chinese and
      Korean locales.
      
sdk2-dev10.0.tar.gz
    - Input Method Server Developer Kit and documents, incorporating
      sample implementations for various platforms, including
      Solaris, Linux, and others.
    
csconv.tar.gz
    - Code Conversion libraries between Unicode encodings
      and various native character set encodings.

LIMITATIONS IN THIS RELEASE:

1. Japanese Input Methods

  Interface to the existing Japanese Input Method engines

  The IIIM Server Framework carries the upward compatible language
  engine interface with the Input Method Server "htt" released with
  X11R5, which can be found in contrib/im/Ximp/sun/Htt in the 
  X11R5 distribution.

  There has been a Canna interface module and a Wnn4 Interface module
  developed as free software and used with this X11R5 version of htt,
  however, they are not included in this phase of the release.
  
  The interface used by the Canna interface module and the Wnn4
  Interface module is for backward compatibility, and we would like to
  promote the new version of language engine interface based on
  Unicode. The interface modules which will be released in the second
  phase may not include the particular version which was used with the
  interface for backward compatibility.

  There are two Wnn6 engine interface modules which exist on Solaris,
  one is X dependent and one is X independent are not part of this
  package, because those interface modules include licensed code
  from a 3rd party.

2. Traditional Chinese Input Methods

  What we are implementing for Traditional Chinese for future release
  with Solaris is a code table based input method frame work.  With
  that frame work, users will be able to add any code table based
  input methods such as Boshiamy, DaYi, HangLie, Wubi, etc.  There
  will be two code tables bundled with this framework for Traditional
  Chinese:
	1. ChuYin table which is based on the Chinese phonetic
	   system.
	2. CangJie table, a free available mapping table for
	   Traditional Chinese input.

  The current release does not contain support for Traditional Chinese
  since the current, old input methods were not easily made open
  source and portable, and the new methods are not yet available.  We
  hope to include these with the second phase release.

3. Complex Text Layout Integration

  We have includes layout engines for Arabic, Hebrew and Thai,
  however, because of some unresolved license issues we were unable to
  release the CTL code that links these layout engines to the desktop
  software.  In the second phase of our release, we will be providing
  the code to integrate these layout engines.

  here are some details about the layout engines provided:

  Arabic Layout Engine

  This engine provides the rendering for Arabic script according to
  the Bidirectional standard from Unicode 3.0.  The engine processes
  the Arabic character set which is ISO8859-6 and provides output as
  a list of font glyphs based on Arabic presentation form B.

  Hebrew Layout Engine

  This engine provides the rendering for Hebrew script according to
  the Bidirectional standard from Unicode 3.0.  The engine processes
  the Hebrew character set which is ISO8859-8.

  Thai Layout Engine

  This engine provides the rendering for Thai script according to the
  standard Wtt specification (version 2.0) from NECTEC. The engine
  processes the Thai character set which is TIS620.2533 and provides
  output as a list of font glyphs based on the most popular layout
  method being used in the Thai industry.
